---
title: Why Give AI Agents Access to Money?
original: https://medium.com/@pol.avec/why-give-ai-agents-access-to-money-be460a819a9c
images:
- images/1*nIukoXOaNmaVjaV93QTpsA.png
---

The current wave of AI automation largely focuses on optimizing existing
workflows — making them faster, more efficient, or better tailored to user
needs. While valuable, this approach merely scratches the surface of AI’s
potential. The real revolution lies in enabling AI to drive genuine innovation
by participating directly in the market economy.

True innovation in a market economy means finding novel applications for
limited resources that create more value than they consume. For AI to do this,
it needs more than just the ability to analyze — it needs to effect change in
the world. And in our economy, that requires the ability to pay for resources.

The key transformation is from AI-as-tools to AI-as-innovators. When we treat
AI as tools, we limit them to optimizing what exists. But innovators need
capital — to acquire and experiment with resources freely. By giving AI agents
both the ability to discover new tools at runtime and deploy capital to use
them, we transform them from optimization engines into genuine innovators.

Consider Replit’s AI agents that can build software tools independently. While
powerful, they’re still limited by their inability to access paid services or
APIs they might need without human supervision. Imagine instead if these
agents could discover and integrate new APIs at runtime, pay for necessary
cloud resources, or even hire other AI services to solve parts of the problem.
That’s when we’ll see true AI-driven innovation.

This isn’t about making existing processes better. It’s about enabling AI to
create things we haven’t imagined yet. By giving AI agents both the tools to
discover new possibilities and the capital to pursue them, we’re enabling them
to help create the future.


